Bengt/specs pgf (#1268)
anoma/namada: documentation/specs/src/economics/public-goods-funding.md

- External public goods
  _External public goods_ covers funding for public goods explicitly external to the Namada and Namada ecosystem, including carbon sequestration, independent journalism, direct cash transfers, legal advocacy, etc. Possible funding forms could include direct purchase of tokenised assets such as carbon credits, direct cash transfers (e.g. GiveDirectly), institutional funding (e.g. Wikileaks), and similar.

## The Public Goods Stewards

The funding of public goods on Namada will be conducted through a structure we call "Public Goods Stewards".

Each steward is elected by governance through separate governance proposals. Each steward will be responsible for covering a specific area of public goods, which they describe during their election. Stewards can then "propose" funding of various public goods, which will pass by default. However, Governance retains the power to veto any proposal, which would result in the Steward being removed from the set of Stewards.

> ## Voting for the Steward

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Voting for stewards
```

### What is a Steward (technically)?

> All valid PGF stewards will be established multisignature account addresses. These must be created by the intdended parties (which may very well be just one person, but could be more) that wish to represent the Steward entity. For example, if David Alice and Bob wish to represent the combined steward DAB, they may do so as a common entity. But likewise, Alice can create her own 1-out-of-1 multisig that to just represent herself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All valid PGF stewards will be established multisignature account addresses. These must be created by the intended parties (which may very well be just one person, but could be more) that wish to represent the steward entity. For example, if David Alice and Bob wish to represent the combined steward DAB, they may do so as a common entity. But likewise, Alice can create her own 1-out-of-1 multisig that to just represent herself.
```

### Becoming a Steward

> The first step towards becoming a Steward is to instantiate a multisignature account. This is done through the CLI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step towards becoming a steward is to instantiate a multisignature account. This is done through the CLI.
```

let's not capitalise this, at least here

> In order to propose candidacy as a PGF Steward, the Steward must initiate a custom governance proposal. At the cost of deposited NAM, the governance proposal is broadcasted on-chain and governance is able to vote on whether the Steward-applicant will be accepted or not. Together with this proposal, the applicant is encouraged to provide a motivational statement as to why they should be entrusted with the responsibility of proposing public goods candidates. This will also include a commitment to at least one of the categories of public goods funding that social consensus has established (or propose their own category, which would inherintly introduce a new category into social consensus, should the proposal be accepted).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to propose candidacy as a PGF Steward, the steward must initiate a custom governance proposal. At the cost of deposited NAM, the governance proposal is broadcast on-chain and governance is able to vote on whether the steward-applicant will be accepted or not. Together with this proposal, the applicant is encouraged to provide a motivational statement as to why they should be entrusted with the responsibility of proposing public goods candidates. This will also include a commitment to at least one of the categories of public goods funding that social consensus has established (or propose their own category, which would inherently introduce a new category into social consensus, should the proposal be accepted).
```

> Proposing candidacy as a PGF Steward is something that is done at any time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nominating oneself as a PGF steward may be done at any time.
```

### Losing Stewardship Status

> There are 3 ways that a Steward be removed from the Steward Set:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are 3 ways that a steward can be removed from the steward set:
```

1. Resign as a steward
2. Have a failed funding proposal
3. Become voted out through a governance proposal

Resigning as a Steward is straight-forward. A simple CLI is implemented to allow for this so that the established account representing the Steward loses their priveleges as a PG Steward.

> If the Steward's PGF proposal receives a significant number of `Nay` votes ($\frac{2}{3}$ as a fraction of voting-power), they will be removed from the Steward set. It is likely that there would only be such wide-speread disagreement if the proposal was misaligned with the users the Stewards is attempting to cater to. This is described in more detail under [its section](#proposing-funding).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a steward's PGF proposal receives a significant number of `Nay` votes ($\frac{2}{3}$ as a fraction of voting-power), they will be removed from the steward set. It is likely that there would only be such widespread disagreement if the proposal was misaligned with the users the steward is attempting to cater to. This is described in more detail under [its section](#proposing-funding).
```

> Finally, the Steward can be "voted-out" from its responsibility through a custom governance proposal similar to the one used to elect the Steward in the first place!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the steward can be "voted-out" from its responsibility through a custom governance proposal similar to the one used to elect the steward in the first place.
```

#### "Voting-out" the Steward

> In the same way that a Steward can be voted in by Namada governance through a custom proposal, the equal and opposite force exists. Hence, any governance member (validator or delegate), is able to initiate a vote (for the relevant cost) in order to remove an arbitrary number of current PGF Stewards. If this proposal passes, it signals that the Steward(s) has/have not fulfilled their duty to the public, which the Stewards are meant to serve (hence the name).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the same way that a Steward can be voted in by Namada governance through a custom proposal, the equal and opposite force exists. Hence, any governance member (validator or delegate), is able to initiate a vote (for the relevant cost) in order to remove an arbitrary number of current PGF stewards. If this proposal passes, it signals that the steward(s) has/have not fulfilled their duty to the public, which the stewards are meant to serve (hence the name).
```

### Initiating the vote

> Before a new PGF Steward can either be elected or removed, a governance proposal that specifies this objective must pass. The voting on this proposal is handled by the governance proposal type `StewardProposal`, which is a Custom Proposal type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before a new PGF steward can either be elected or removed, a governance proposal that specifies this objective must pass. The voting on this proposal is handled by the governance proposal type `StewardProposal`, which is a custom proposal type.
```

The struct of `StewardProposal` is constructed as follows, and is explained in more detail in the [governance specs](../base-ledger/governance.md)

```rust
struct StewardProposal{
  id: u64
  content: Vec<u8>,
  author: Address,
  r#type: PGFSteward,
  votingStartEpoch: Epoch,
  votingEndEpoch: Epoch,
  graceEpoch: Epoch,
}
```

>  In order for a new PGF Steward to be elected (or removed), $\frac{2}{3}$ of validating power must vote on the `StewardProposal` and more than half of the votes must be in favor. If more than half of the votes are against the proposal, the Steward set is kept the same, and the proposer of the proposal loses their escrowed funds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 In order for a new PGF steward to be elected (or removed), $\frac{2}{3}$ of validating power must vote on the `StewardProposal` and more than half of the votes must be in favor. If more than half of the votes are against the proposal, the steward set is kept the same, and the proposer of the proposal loses their escrowed funds.
```

See the example below for more detail, as it may serve as the best medium for explaining the mechanism.

> ### Voting on the Steward

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Voting on the steward
```

> After the `StewardProposal` has been submitted, and once the Steward's address has been constructed and broadcasted, the Steward address can be voted on by governance particpants. All voting must occur between `votingStartEpoch` and `votingEndEpoch`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the `StewardProposal` has been submitted, and once the steward's address has been constructed and broadcasted, the steward address can be voted on by governance participants. All voting must occur between `votingStartEpoch` and `votingEndEpoch`.
```

> The vote for a Steward addresses's membership will be constructed as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The vote for a new steward nomination will be constructed as follows:
```

- Education
  _Education_ covers the funding for open and free to use knowledge, compiled and/or produced by educators in various forms. This can include authors of books, blog-posts, podcasts websites and other educational materials. In a sense, this is a type of *meta public good*, as open knowledge often sparks more open knowledge, although not necessarily

- Meta Public Goods
_Meta public goods_ covers funding for any good that increases the production or existence of other public goods. The management of forums, libraries, quadratic funding protocols, dominant assurance contracts, etc. are good examples of this.

- External public goods
  _External public goods_ covers funding for public goods explicitly external to the Namada and Namada ecosystem, including carbon sequestration, independent journalism, direct cash transfers, legal advocacy, etc. Possible funding forms could include direct purchase of tokenised assets such as carbon credits, direct cash transfers (e.g. GiveDirectly), institutional funding (e.g. Wikileaks), and similar.

## The Public Goods Stewards

The funding of public goods on Namada will be conducted through a structure we call "Public Goods Stewards".

> Stewards are elected by governance through a governance proposal. Each Steward will be specialised in funding a subset of categories, which they specify during their election. Stewards can then "propose" funding of various public goods, which will pass by default. However, Governance retains the power to veto any proposal, which would result in the Steward being removed from the set of Stewards.

Reviewer: I'd say - each steward will be responsible for covering a specific area of public goods, which they describe during their election.

The areas don't need to exactly correspond to the categories - actually, we should probably get rid of "categories" and just list a bunch of different kinds of public goods which Namada is interested in funding.

Proposing candidacy as a PGF Steward is something that is done at any time.

### Losing Stewardship Status

There are 3 ways that a Steward be removed from the Steward Set:

1. Resign as a steward
2. Have a failed funding proposal
3. Become voted out through a governance proposal

Resigning as a Steward is straight-forward. A simple CLI is implemented to allow for this so that the established account representing the Steward loses their priveleges as a PG Steward.

> When a Steward's funding proposal is rejected (remember that the threshold for this to occur is at lest $\frac{2/3}$), then the proposal does not pass. In addition to this, it is likely that there would only be such wide-speread disagreement if the proposal was misaligned with the users the Stewards is attempting to cater to. This is described in more detail under [its section](#proposing-funding).

Reviewer: should we do the 1/3 blocks, 2/3 kicks out steward thing?

Reviewer: oh you mention this below, but we should clarify it here

Reviewer: ah yes, I mean a majority, with at least 1/3 voting

}
```

Where the proposalVote is simply an enum dictating whether the voter voted `Yay` or `Nay` to the proposed candidate change.

#### Dealing with ties

> In the rare occurance of a tie, the Steward retains membership by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the rare occurance of a tie, the steward retains membership by default.
```

> ### Electing the Steward

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Electing the steward
```

> Once the decision has been made on whether to elect (or remove) the intended Steward, the established address corresponding to the multisig is added to (removed from) the `PGF` internal address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the decision has been made on whether to elect (or remove) the intended steward, the established address corresponding to the multisig is added to (removed from) the `PGF` internal address.
```

````admonish note
The governance set consists of Alice, Bob, Charlie, Dave, and Elsa. Each member has 20% voting power.

> The current PGF Stewards are Dave and Elsa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current PGF stewards are Dave and Elsa.
```

    yay: proposalVote,
}
```
Where the proposalVote is simply the enum `Yay` with an empty memo field.

- At epoch 49, Bob and Elsa submit an identical transaction.

- At epoch 50, Dave votes `Nay` on the proposal.

- At epoch 54, the voting period ends and the votes are tallied. Since 80% > 66% of the voting power voted on this proposal (everyone except Charlie, who forgot to vote on her own proposal), the intitial condition is passed and the Proposal is active. Further, because out of the total votes, most were `Yay`, (75% > 50% threshold), the new Steward consisting of Bob and Charlie will be added to the Steward set. 

- At epoch 57, Bob and Charlie have the effective power to propose Public Goods Funding transactions (that may or may not be vetoed).
````

## Mechanism

> Once elected and instantiated, PGF Stewards will then unilaterally be able to sign transactions that propose either RPGF or CPGF funding. The PGF Stewards as a whole will have an "allowance" to spend up to the `PGF` internal address's balance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once elected and instantiated, PGF stewards will then unilaterally be able to sign transactions that propose either RPGF or CPGF funding. The PGF stewards as a whole will have an "allowance" to spend up to the `PGF` internal address's balance.
```

### Proposing Funding

> In order to propose funding, any Steward will be able to propose a PGFProposal through governance. Only Stewards will be valid authors of these proposals. There will be a minimum voting period set specifically for these types of proposals and can be changed by Governance. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to propose funding, any steward will be able to propose a PGFProposal through governance. Only stewards will be valid authors of these proposals. There will be a minimum voting period set specifically for these types of proposals and can be changed by governance. 
```

Reviewer: what's with the capitals :laughing:

This governance proposal will be such that it passes by default **unless** the following conditions are met:

Conditions to veto a PGF proposal:
1. At least $\frac{1}{3}$ of voting power voted on the proposal
2. Out of the votes, more than $50\%$ voted `Nay` on the proposal

>   - Further, if at least $\frac{2}{3}$ of voting power voted on the proposal, and the proposal was rejected, the Steward is removed from the set of stewards.

Reviewer: hmm. one oddity with this is that if 51% vote against, if 1/3 vote the steward is not kicked out, but if 2/3 vote the steward is kicked out. maybe we should do 2/3 of 2/3? not sure.

Author: Yes I agree, 2/3 of 2/3 makes more sense

Author: Or it's slightly different now, I'm thinking 2/3 of voting-power must vote Nay. Lmk what you think, is this too strict?

Reviewer: of the total voting power, or of the voting power voting?

> The PGF Stewards should be able to propose both retroactive and continuous public funding transactions. Retroactive public funding transactions are straightforward and implement no additional logic to a normal transfer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PGF stewards should be able to propose both retroactive and continuous public funding transactions. Retroactive public funding transactions are straightforward and implement no additional logic to a normal transfer.
```

However, for continuous PGF (cPGF), the Stewards should be able to submit a one time transaction which indicates the recipient addresses that should be eligble for receiveing cPGF. 

> The following data is attached to the PGF transaction and will allow the Stewards to represent the projects they wish to be continously funded. Each tuple represent the address of the recipient and the respective amount of NAM that the recipient will receive every epoch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following data is attached to the PGF transaction and will allow the stewards to represent the projects they wish to be continously funded. Each tuple represent the address of the recipient and the respective amount of NAM that the recipient will receive every epoch.
```

impl remRecipient for cPgfRecipients
```

## PGF stewards incentives

> Being a PGF steward is (should be) hard work. Stewards must invest their time in crafting proposals, being in touch with the opinions of the Namada community, and taking the risks associated with being voted out. In order to incentivise this effort, Namada allocates a set amount of NAM inflation that is directed towards the Stewards. This parameter is set by governance and is included in genesis by default. That allocation is then split equally between each PGF Steward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Being a PGF steward is (should be) hard work. Stewards must invest their time in crafting proposals, being in touch with the opinions of the Namada community, and taking the risks associated with being voted out. In order to incentivise this effort, Namada allocates a set amount of NAM inflation that is directed towards the stewards. This parameter is set by governance and is included in genesis by default. That allocation is paid to each steward.
```

we do not want to split it between them, it creates competitive dynamics. there should just be a fixed rate that is paid to every steward (so more is paid if there are more stewards, and less is paid if there are fewer stewards)

## Addresses
Governance adds 1 internal address:

`PGF` internal address

> The internal address VP will hold the allowance the 10% inflation of NAM. This funding will be allocated to the internal address at the start of each epoch. It is important to note that it is this internal address which holds the funds, rather than any of the Stewards' multisigs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The internal address VP will hold the allowance the 10% inflation of NAM. This funding will be allocated to the internal address at the start of each epoch. It is important to note that it is this internal address which holds the funds, rather than any of the stewards' multisigs.
```

> The Stewards should be able to propose the burning of funds, but this hopefully should not require additional functionality beyond what currently exists.

Reviewer: for what?

### VP checks

> The VP must check that the Stewards spending does not exceed the balance of the VP (in aggregate).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The VP must check that the steward's spending does not exceed the balance of the VP (in aggregate).
```

> The VP must also check that the any spending is only done by a the active correctly elected PGF Stewards.

Reviewer: what is this sentence trying to say

Author: my bad
